src/mono/wasm/README.md, before:

# Building

This depends on `emsdk` to be installed.

## emsdk on macOS

* You can run `make provision-wasm`, which will install it to `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk` .
Note: Irrespective of `$(EMSDK_PATH)`'s value, `provision-wasm` will always install into `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk`.

`EMSDK_PATH` is set to `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk` by default, by the Makefile.

Note: `EMSDK_PATH` is set by default in `src/mono/wasm/Makefile`, so building targets from that will have it set. But you might need to set it manually if
you are directly using the `dotnet build`, or `build.sh`.

* Alternatively you can install **correct version** yourself from the [Emscripten SDK guide](https://emscripten.org/docs/getting_started/downloads.html).
Do not install `latest` but rather specific version e.g. `./emsdk install 2.0.23`. See [emscripten-version.txt](./emscripten-version.txt)

Make sure to set `EMSDK_PATH` variable, whenever building, or running tests for wasm.

## Building on macOS

* To build the whole thing, with libraries:

`make build-all`

* To build just the runtime (useful when doing incremental builds with only runtime changes):

`make runtime`

**Note:** Additional msbuild arguments can be passed with: `make build-all MSBUILD_ARGS="/p:a=b"`

## emsdk on Windows

Windows build [requirements](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/workflow/requirements/windows-requirements.md)

If `EMSDK_PATH` is not set, the `emsdk` should be provisioned automatically during the build.

**Note:** The EMSDK has an implicit dependency on Python for it to be initialized. A consequence of this is that if the system doesn't have Python installed prior to attempting a build, the automatic provisioning will fail and be in an invalid state. Therefore, if Python needs to be installed after a build attempt the `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk` directory should be manually deleted and then a rebuild attempted.

## Bulding on Windows

* To build everything

`build.cmd -os Browser -subset mono+libs` in the repo top level directory.

# Running tests

## Installation of JavaScript engines

The latest engines can be installed with jsvu (JavaScript engine Version Updater https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/jsvu)

### macOS

* Install npm with brew:

`brew install npm`

* Install jsvu with npm:

`npm install jsvu -g`

* Run jsvu and install `v8`, `SpiderMonkey`, or `JavaScriptCore` engines:

`jsvu`

Add `~/.jsvu` to your `PATH`:

`export PATH="${HOME}/.jsvu:${PATH}"`

### Windows

* Install node/npm from https://nodejs.org/en/ and add its npm and nodejs directories to the `PATH` environment variable

* * Install jsvu with npm:

`npm install jsvu -g`

* Run jsvu and install `v8`, `SpiderMonkey`, or `JavaScriptCore` engines:

`jsvu`

* Add `~/.jsvu` to the `PATH` environment variable

## Libraries tests

Library tests can be run with js engines: `v8`, `SpiderMonkey`,or `JavaScriptCore`:

### macOS

* `v8`: `make run-tests-v8-$(lib_name)`
* SpiderMonkey: `make run-tests-sm-$(lib_name)`
* JavaScriptCore: `make run-tests-jsc-$(lib_name)`
* Or default: `make run-tests-$(lib_name)`. This runs the tests with `v8`.

For example, for `System.Collections.Concurrent`: `make run-tests-v8-System.Collections.Concurrent`

### Windows

Library tests on windows can be run as described in [testing-libraries](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/workflow/testing/libraries/testing.md#testing-libraries) documentation. Without setting additional properties, it will run tests for all libraries on `v8` engine:

`.\build.cmd libs.tests -test -os browser`

* `JSEngine` property can be used to specify which engine to use. Right now `v8` and `SpiderMonkey` engines can be used.

Examples of running tests for individual libraries:

`.\dotnet.cmd build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=Browser src\libraries\System.Collections.Concurrent\tests`
`.\dotnet.cmd build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=Browser /p:JSEngine="SpiderMonkey" src\libraries\System.Text.Json\tests`

### Browser tests on macOS

Or they can be run with a browser (Chrome):

`make run-browser-tests-$(lib_name)`

Note: this needs `chromedriver`, and `Google Chrome` to be installed.

For example, for `System.Collections.Concurrent`: `make run-browser-tests-System.Collections.Concurrent`

These tests are run with `xharness wasm test-browser`, for running on the browser. And `xharness wasm test` for others.
The wrapper script used to actually run these tests, accepts:

`$XHARNESS_COMMAND`, which defaults to `test`.
`$XHARNESS_CLI_PATH` (see next section)

### Using a local build of xharness

* set `XHARNESS_CLI_PATH=/path/to/xharness/artifacts/bin/Microsoft.DotNet.XHarness.CLI/Debug/netcoreapp3.1/Microsoft.DotNet.XHarness.CLI.dll`

**Note:** Additional msbuild arguments can be passed with: `make ..  MSBUILD_ARGS="/p:a=b"`

### Symbolicating traces

Exceptions thrown after the runtime starts get symbolicating from js itself. Exceptions before that, like asserts containing native traces get symbolicated by xharness using `src/mono/wasm/symbolicator`.

If you need to symbolicate some traces manually, then you need the corresponding `dotnet.js.symbols` file. Then:

```
src/mono/wasm/symbolicator$ dotnet run /path/to/dotnet.js.symbols /path/to/file/with/traces
```

When not relinking, or not building with AOT, you can find `dotnet.js.symbols` in the runtime pack.

## Debugger tests on macOS

Debugger tests need `Google Chrome` to be installed.

`make run-debugger-tests`

To run a test with `FooBar` in the name:

`make run-debugger-tests TEST_FILTER=FooBar`

(See https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/testing/selective-unit-tests?pivots=xunit for filter options)

Additional arguments for `dotnet test` can be passed via `MSBUILD_ARGS` or `TEST_ARGS`. For example `MSBUILD_ARGS="/p:WasmDebugLevel=5"`. Though only one of `TEST_ARGS`, or `TEST_FILTER` can be used at a time.

- Chrome can be installed for testing by setting `InstallChromeForDebuggerTests=true` when building the tests.

## Run samples

The samples in `src/mono/sample/wasm` can be build and run like this:

* console Hello world sample

`dotnet build /t:RunSample console-v8-cjs/Wasm.Console.V8.CJS.Sample.csproj`

* browser TestMeaning sample

`dotnet build /t:RunSample browser/Wasm.Browser.CJS.Sample.csproj`

To build and run the samples with AOT, add `/p:RunAOTCompilation=true` to the above command lines.

* bench sample

Also check [bench](../sample/wasm/browser-bench/README.md) sample to measure mono/wasm runtime performance.

## Templates

The wasm templates, located in the `templates` directory, are templates for `dotnet new`, VS and VS for Mac. They are packaged and distributed as part of the `wasm-tools` workload. We have 2 templates, `wasmbrowser` and `wasmconsole`, for browser and console WebAssembly applications.

For details about using `dotnet new` see the dotnet tool [documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-new).

To test changes in the templates, use `dotnet new -i <path>`.

Example use of the `wasmconsole` template:

    > dotnet new wasmconsole
    > dotnet publish
    > cd bin/Debug/net7.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle
    > node main.cjs
    mono_wasm_runtime_ready fe00e07a-5519-4dfe-b35a-f867dbaf2e28
    Hello World!
    Args:

## Upgrading Emscripten

Bumping Emscripten version involves these steps:

* update https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/mono/wasm/emscripten-version.txt
* bump emscripten versions in docker images in https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker
* bump emscripten in https://github.com/dotnet/emsdk
* bump docker images in https://github.com/dotnet/icu, update emscripten files in eng/patches/
* update version number in docs
* update `Microsoft.NET.Runtime.Emscripten.<emscripten version>.Node.win-x64` package name, version and sha hash in https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/Version.Details.xml and in https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/Versions.props. the sha is the commit hash in https://github.com/dotnet/emsdk and the package version can be found at https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/public/_packaging?_a=feed&feed=dotnet6
* update packages in the workload manifest https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/mono/nuget/Microsoft.NET.Workload.Mono.Toolchain.Manifest/WorkloadManifest.json.in

## Code style
* Is enforced via [eslint](https://eslint.org/) and rules are in `./.eslintrc.js`
* You could check the style by running `npm run lint` in `src/mono/wasm/runtime` directory
* You can install [plugin into your VS Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbaeumer.vscode-eslint) to show you the errors as you type


## Builds on CI

* For PRs, tests are generally triggered based on path changes. But if you have a change which would not trigger the relevant builds, then you can run `runtime-wasm` pipeline manually to run all of them. Comment `/azp run runtime-wasm` on the PR.

### How do I know which jobs run on CI, and when?

## PR:
* `runtime-extra-platforms`, and `runtime-wasm` run only when manually triggered with a comment - `/azp run <pipeline-name>`
* `runtime`, and `runtime-staging`, run jobs only when relevant paths change. And for `EAT`, and `AOT`, only smoke tests are run.
* And when `runtime-wasm` is triggered manually, it runs *all* the wasm jobs completely

| .                 | runtime               | runtime-staging         | runtime-extra-platforms(manual only) | runtime-wasm (manual only) |
| ----------------- | --------------------  | ---------------         | ------------------------------------ | -------                    |
| libtests          | linux: all,   only-pc | windows: all,   only-pc | linux+windows: all, only-pc          | linux+windows: all, always |
| libtests eat      | linux: smoke, only-pc | -                       | linux:         all, only-pc          | linux:         all, always |
| libtests aot      | linux: smoke, only-pc | windows: smoke, only-pc | linux+windows: all, only-pc          | linux+windows: all, always |
| high resource aot | none                  | none                    | linux+windows: all, only-pc          | linux+windows: all, always |
| Wasm.Build.Tests  | linux:        only-pc | windows:        only-pc | linux+windows: only-pc               | linux+windows              |
| Debugger tests    | -                     | linux+windows:  only-pc | linux+windows: only-pc               | linux+windows              |
| Runtime tests     | linux:        only-pc | -                       | linux: only-pc                       | linux                      |

* `high resource aot` runs a few specific library tests with AOT, that require more memory to AOT.

## Rolling build (twice a day):

* `runtime`, and `runtime-staging`, run all the wasm jobs unconditionally, but `EAT`, and `AOT` still run only smoke tests.
* `runtime-extra-platforms` also runs by default. And it runs only the cases not covered by the above two pipelines.

* jobs w/o `only-pc` are always run

| .                 | runtime                   | runtime-staging       | runtime-extra-platforms (always run) | runtime-wasm (manual only) |
| ----------------- | -------------             | ---------------       | ------------------------------------ | ------                     |
| libtests          | linux: all(v8/chr)        | windows: all          | none                                 | N/A                        |
| libtests eat      | linux: smoke              | -                     | linux: all                           |                            |
| libtests aot      | linux: smoke              | windows: smoke        | linux+windows: all                   |                            |
| high resource aot | none                      | none                  | linux+windows: all                   |                            |
|                   |                           |                       |                                      |                            |
| Wasm.Build.Tests  | linux: always             | windows: always       | none                                 |                            |
| Debugger tests    | -                         | linux+windows: always | none                                 |                            |
| Runtime tests     | linux: always             | -                     | none                                 |                            |

* `high resource aot` runs a few specific library tests with AOT, that require more memory to AOT.

Commit message:

[wasm] Switch default modules to es6 (#70746)
switched dotnet.js to be ES6 module by making <WasmEnableES6> default true
updated all samples
updated functional tests
updated debugger tests
updated test-main
updated templates

Co-authored-by: Marek Fišera <mara@neptuo.com>
Co-authored-by: Ankit Jain <radical@gmail.com>

src/mono/wasm/README.md, after:

# Building

This depends on `emsdk` to be installed.

## emsdk on macOS

* You can run `make provision-wasm`, which will install it to `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk` .
Note: Irrespective of `$(EMSDK_PATH)`'s value, `provision-wasm` will always install into `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk`.

`EMSDK_PATH` is set to `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk` by default, by the Makefile.

Note: `EMSDK_PATH` is set by default in `src/mono/wasm/Makefile`, so building targets from that will have it set. But you might need to set it manually if
you are directly using the `dotnet build`, or `build.sh`.

* Alternatively you can install **correct version** yourself from the [Emscripten SDK guide](https://emscripten.org/docs/getting_started/downloads.html).
Do not install `latest` but rather specific version e.g. `./emsdk install 2.0.23`. See [emscripten-version.txt](./emscripten-version.txt)

Make sure to set `EMSDK_PATH` variable, whenever building, or running tests for wasm.

## Building on macOS

* To build the whole thing, with libraries:

`make build-all`

* To build just the runtime (useful when doing incremental builds with only runtime changes):

`make runtime`

**Note:** Additional msbuild arguments can be passed with: `make build-all MSBUILD_ARGS="/p:a=b"`

## emsdk on Windows

Windows build [requirements](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/workflow/requirements/windows-requirements.md)

If `EMSDK_PATH` is not set, the `emsdk` should be provisioned automatically during the build.

**Note:** The EMSDK has an implicit dependency on Python for it to be initialized. A consequence of this is that if the system doesn't have Python installed prior to attempting a build, the automatic provisioning will fail and be in an invalid state. Therefore, if Python needs to be installed after a build attempt the `$reporoot/src/mono/wasm/emsdk` directory should be manually deleted and then a rebuild attempted.

## Bulding on Windows

* To build everything

`build.cmd -os Browser -subset mono+libs` in the repo top level directory.

# Running tests

## Installation of JavaScript engines

The latest engines can be installed with jsvu (JavaScript engine Version Updater https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/jsvu)

### macOS

* Install npm with brew:

`brew install npm`

* Install jsvu with npm:

`npm install jsvu -g`

* Run jsvu and install `v8`, `SpiderMonkey`, or `JavaScriptCore` engines:

`jsvu`

Add `~/.jsvu` to your `PATH`:

`export PATH="${HOME}/.jsvu:${PATH}"`

### Windows

* Install node/npm from https://nodejs.org/en/ and add its npm and nodejs directories to the `PATH` environment variable

* * Install jsvu with npm:

`npm install jsvu -g`

* Run jsvu and install `v8`, `SpiderMonkey`, or `JavaScriptCore` engines:

`jsvu`

* Add `~/.jsvu` to the `PATH` environment variable

## Libraries tests

Library tests can be run with js engines: `v8`, `SpiderMonkey`,or `JavaScriptCore`:

### macOS

* `v8`: `make run-tests-v8-$(lib_name)`
* SpiderMonkey: `make run-tests-sm-$(lib_name)`
* JavaScriptCore: `make run-tests-jsc-$(lib_name)`
* Or default: `make run-tests-$(lib_name)`. This runs the tests with `v8`.

For example, for `System.Collections.Concurrent`: `make run-tests-v8-System.Collections.Concurrent`

### Windows

Library tests on windows can be run as described in [testing-libraries](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/workflow/testing/libraries/testing.md#testing-libraries) documentation. Without setting additional properties, it will run tests for all libraries on `v8` engine:

`.\build.cmd libs.tests -test -os browser`

* `JSEngine` property can be used to specify which engine to use. Right now `v8` and `SpiderMonkey` engines can be used.

Examples of running tests for individual libraries:

`.\dotnet.cmd build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=Browser src\libraries\System.Collections.Concurrent\tests`
`.\dotnet.cmd build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=Browser /p:JSEngine="SpiderMonkey" src\libraries\System.Text.Json\tests`

### Browser tests on macOS

Or they can be run with a browser (Chrome):

`make run-browser-tests-$(lib_name)`

Note: this needs `chromedriver`, and `Google Chrome` to be installed.

For example, for `System.Collections.Concurrent`: `make run-browser-tests-System.Collections.Concurrent`

These tests are run with `xharness wasm test-browser`, for running on the browser. And `xharness wasm test` for others.
The wrapper script used to actually run these tests, accepts:

`$XHARNESS_COMMAND`, which defaults to `test`.
`$XHARNESS_CLI_PATH` (see next section)

### Using a local build of xharness

* set `XHARNESS_CLI_PATH=/path/to/xharness/artifacts/bin/Microsoft.DotNet.XHarness.CLI/Debug/netcoreapp3.1/Microsoft.DotNet.XHarness.CLI.dll`

**Note:** Additional msbuild arguments can be passed with: `make ..  MSBUILD_ARGS="/p:a=b"`

### Symbolicating traces

Exceptions thrown after the runtime starts get symbolicating from js itself. Exceptions before that, like asserts containing native traces get symbolicated by xharness using `src/mono/wasm/symbolicator`.

If you need to symbolicate some traces manually, then you need the corresponding `dotnet.js.symbols` file. Then:

```
src/mono/wasm/symbolicator$ dotnet run /path/to/dotnet.js.symbols /path/to/file/with/traces
```

When not relinking, or not building with AOT, you can find `dotnet.js.symbols` in the runtime pack.

## Debugger tests on macOS

Debugger tests need `Google Chrome` to be installed.

`make run-debugger-tests`

To run a test with `FooBar` in the name:

`make run-debugger-tests TEST_FILTER=FooBar`

(See https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/testing/selective-unit-tests?pivots=xunit for filter options)

Additional arguments for `dotnet test` can be passed via `MSBUILD_ARGS` or `TEST_ARGS`. For example `MSBUILD_ARGS="/p:WasmDebugLevel=5"`. Though only one of `TEST_ARGS`, or `TEST_FILTER` can be used at a time.

- Chrome can be installed for testing by setting `InstallChromeForDebuggerTests=true` when building the tests.

## Run samples

The samples in `src/mono/sample/wasm` can be build and run like this:

* console Hello world sample

`dotnet build /t:RunSample console-v8-cjs/Wasm.Console.V8.CJS.Sample.csproj`

* browser TestMeaning sample

`dotnet build /t:RunSample browser/Wasm.Browser.CJS.Sample.csproj`

To build and run the samples with AOT, add `/p:RunAOTCompilation=true` to the above command lines.

* bench sample

Also check [bench](../sample/wasm/browser-bench/README.md) sample to measure mono/wasm runtime performance.

## Templates

The wasm templates, located in the `templates` directory, are templates for `dotnet new`, VS and VS for Mac. They are packaged and distributed as part of the `wasm-tools` workload. We have 2 templates, `wasmbrowser` and `wasmconsole`, for browser and console WebAssembly applications.

For details about using `dotnet new` see the dotnet tool [documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-new).

To test changes in the templates, use `dotnet new install --force src/mono/wasm/templates/templates/browser`.

Example use of the `wasmconsole` template:

    > dotnet new wasmconsole
    > dotnet publish
    > cd bin/Debug/net7.0/browser-wasm/AppBundle
    > node main.cjs
    mono_wasm_runtime_ready fe00e07a-5519-4dfe-b35a-f867dbaf2e28
    Hello World!
    Args:

## Upgrading Emscripten

Bumping Emscripten version involves these steps:

* update https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/mono/wasm/emscripten-version.txt
* bump emscripten versions in docker images in https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker
* bump emscripten in https://github.com/dotnet/emsdk
* bump docker images in https://github.com/dotnet/icu, update emscripten files in eng/patches/
* update version number in docs
* update `Microsoft.NET.Runtime.Emscripten.<emscripten version>.Node.win-x64` package name, version and sha hash in https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/Version.Details.xml and in https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/Versions.props. the sha is the commit hash in https://github.com/dotnet/emsdk and the package version can be found at https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/public/_packaging?_a=feed&feed=dotnet6
* update packages in the workload manifest https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/mono/nuget/Microsoft.NET.Workload.Mono.Toolchain.Manifest/WorkloadManifest.json.in

## Code style
* Is enforced via [eslint](https://eslint.org/) and rules are in `./.eslintrc.js`
* You could check the style by running `npm run lint` in `src/mono/wasm/runtime` directory
* You can install [plugin into your VS Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbaeumer.vscode-eslint) to show you the errors as you type


## Builds on CI

* For PRs, tests are generally triggered based on path changes. But if you have a change which would not trigger the relevant builds, then you can run `runtime-wasm` pipeline manually to run all of them. Comment `/azp run runtime-wasm` on the PR.

### How do I know which jobs run on CI, and when?

## PR:
* `runtime-extra-platforms`, and `runtime-wasm` run only when manually triggered with a comment - `/azp run <pipeline-name>`
* `runtime`, and `runtime-staging`, run jobs only when relevant paths change. And for `EAT`, and `AOT`, only smoke tests are run.
* And when `runtime-wasm` is triggered manually, it runs *all* the wasm jobs completely

| .                 | runtime               | runtime-staging         | runtime-extra-platforms(manual only) | runtime-wasm (manual only) |
| ----------------- | --------------------  | ---------------         | ------------------------------------ | -------                    |
| libtests          | linux: all,   only-pc | windows: all,   only-pc | linux+windows: all, only-pc          | linux+windows: all, always |
| libtests eat      | linux: smoke, only-pc | -                       | linux:         all, only-pc          | linux:         all, always |
| libtests aot      | linux: smoke, only-pc | windows: smoke, only-pc | linux+windows: all, only-pc          | linux+windows: all, always |
| high resource aot | none                  | none                    | linux+windows: all, only-pc          | linux+windows: all, always |
| Wasm.Build.Tests  | linux:        only-pc | windows:        only-pc | linux+windows: only-pc               | linux+windows              |
| Debugger tests    | -                     | linux+windows:  only-pc | linux+windows: only-pc               | linux+windows              |
| Runtime tests     | linux:        only-pc | -                       | linux: only-pc                       | linux                      |

* `high resource aot` runs a few specific library tests with AOT, that require more memory to AOT.

## Rolling build (twice a day):

* `runtime`, and `runtime-staging`, run all the wasm jobs unconditionally, but `EAT`, and `AOT` still run only smoke tests.
* `runtime-extra-platforms` also runs by default. And it runs only the cases not covered by the above two pipelines.

* jobs w/o `only-pc` are always run

| .                 | runtime                   | runtime-staging       | runtime-extra-platforms (always run) | runtime-wasm (manual only) |
| ----------------- | -------------             | ---------------       | ------------------------------------ | ------                     |
| libtests          | linux: all(v8/chr)        | windows: all          | none                                 | N/A                        |
| libtests eat      | linux: smoke              | -                     | linux: all                           |                            |
| libtests aot      | linux: smoke              | windows: smoke        | linux+windows: all                   |                            |
| high resource aot | none                      | none                  | linux+windows: all                   |                            |
|                   |                           |                       |                                      |                            |
| Wasm.Build.Tests  | linux: always             | windows: always       | none                                 |                            |
| Debugger tests    | -                         | linux+windows: always | none                                 |                            |
| Runtime tests     | linux: always             | -                     | none                                 |                            |

* `high resource aot` runs a few specific library tests with AOT, that require more memory to AOT.
